blog enhancing OS security with OS security patch channel (#4961)
Azure/AKS: blog/_posts/2025-04-22-Enhance-security-OS-Security-Patch.md

This approach, while effective, introduced challenges. Untested or uncontrolled security packages occasionally caused outages, emphasizing the need for a more reliable and managed patching mechanism at the node level. Additionally, maintaining reboot daemonsets like [kured](https://github.com/kubereboot/kured) added operational overhead for many customers. Ideally, customers prefer managed Kubernetes services, such as Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS), to handle OS security patching comprehensively and seamlessly.

## Automatic Node OS Security Patching mechanisms at AKS

> AKS provides two managed and tested mechanisms to deliver the latest security packages to your Node Operating System. Learn more about [OS Security Patch](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/auto-upgrade-node-os-image?tabs=azure-cli).

Reviewer: Link at the end seems out of place? Should be one link at the end of each of the below bullets maybe?

> **Automatic Node Image Channel** - AKS updates nodes weekly with a newly patched VHD for security and bug fixes. This update follows maintenance windows and upgrade configuration settings. Linux unattended upgrades are disabled by default when using this channel. Automatic Node image upgrades are supported as long as the cluster's Kubernetes minor version is in support. These AKS-tested node images are fully managed and applied with safe deployment practices.

Reviewer: Why do we keep talking about unattended upgrades here?

> **OS Security Patch Channel** - Several customers may need only the security packages for their OS without additional bug fixes and updates. The OS Security Patch channel provides a fully managed, attended Node OS security-only solution. It automates manual processes, eliminating the need for tools like KURED to reboot nodes for kernel updates. The Security-Patch channel reimages nodes only when necessary and provides live security patching updates with zero disruption, respecting planned maintenance windows and follows azure safe deployment practices.

Author: Fair remove what it is not.

**Automatic Node Image Channel** - AKS updates nodes weekly with a newly patched VHD for security and bug fixes. This update follows maintenance windows and upgrade configuration settings. Automatic Node image upgrades are supported as long as the cluster's Kubernetes minor version is in support. These AKS-tested node images are fully managed and applied with safe deployment practices.

**OS Security Patch Channel** - Several customers may need only the security packages for their OS without additional bug fixes and updates. The OS Security Patch channel provides a fully managed, attended Node OS security-only solution. The Security-Patch channel reimages nodes only when necessary and provides live security patching updates with zero disruption, respecting planned maintenance windows and follows azure safe deployment practices.

## When to use OS Security Patch or Automatic Node Image Channel?

Choosing between the OS Security Patch channel and the Automatic Node Image channel depends on your specific requirements and operational constraints. Here's a breakdown based on common scenarios:

> - **Speed of Patching is Paramount**: If addressing critical vulnerabilities (CVEs) promptly is a priority, the OS Security Patch channel is the better choice. It delivers updates 1 to 2 weeks faster than the Node Image channel, ensuring your workloads remain secure against emerging threats.

Reviewer: Again here I suggest you position this as a clean comparison, vs claiming one is faster than the other.

As such, suggest:

- replacing promptly with as fast as possible. (we can't assume what a user considers prompt, they might consider 2wks a lot faster than what they need)

- Security patching delivers security fixes in XX days, node image delivers it in 1-2weeks

Or so

- **Require Comprehensive Security Fixes and Bug Fixes**: For environments where both security patches and additional bug fixes or binaries are essential, the Node Image channel is ideal. It provides a more comprehensive update approach, ensuring both security and functionality improvements.

- **Workload Sensitive to Multiple Reimages in a Month**: If your workloads cannot tolerate frequent disruptions, the OS Security Patch channel is preferable. It minimizes disruptions by focusing solely on security packages, reimaging nodes 60-70% less frequently, and performing live security patching during other times.

> - **Using Windows Environment for Running Workloads**: Currently, the OS Security Patch channel is better suited for Linux-based workloads. For Windows environments, the Node Image channel is recommended until OS Security Patch support for Windows is introduced.

Reviewer: Better suited? Does it work with windows? Flourished language doesn't really help in technical docs, if it's not supported yet, then it's not supported yet. Also Az Linux is fully supported by the time this blog is out?

Author: Az linux is already supported except it does not have the Snapshoting of Ubuntu and therefore yet to integrate into all our tests and rel tracker.

> - **Operating in a Capacity-Constrained Region or SKU**: In regions or SKUs with limited capacity, the OS Security Patch channel is advantageous. Its reduced frequency of node reimages helps mitigate surging and ensures smoother operations in constrained environments.

Reviewer: Reimage doesn't require capacity. Don't confuse the user, you're thinking of Node image upgrade with surge settings, which would try to create new nodes (you need to explain this). 
We also have max Unnavailable now too

---
title: "Enhancing Your Operating System's Security with OS Security Patches in AKS"

> description: "Learn the what, the whys, and the hows of configuring OS Security Patch Auto upgrade channel. The article also provides a compelling case for OS Security Patch citing performance, better security, minimal disruption to workloads as chief gains."

Reviewer 2: Reword second sentence a little

```suggestion
description: "Learn the what, the whys, and the hows of configuring OS Security Patch Auto upgrade channel. The article also covers some reasons for OS Security Patch, with some primary benefits being increased performance, better security, and minimal disruption to workloads."
```

date: 2025-04-22
authors:
- Kaarthikeyan Subramanian
- Ye Wang
categories: 
- Security
- Workload SLO

> - Upgrades

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this has changed, but I believe categories have to be limited to:

general
operations
networking
security
developer
addons
ai

Reviewer 2: Citing step 5 here: https://dev.azure.com/msazure/CloudNativeCompute/_wiki/wikis/CloudNativeCompute.wiki/661949/How-to-create-a-Blog-post

---

## Why do we need security patches at the Node Operating System level?

> Operating System (OS) security patches are crucial for maintaining the integrity and security of your systems. These patches address vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors, ensuring that your system remains protected against the latest threats. Regularly applying OS security patches helps to safeguard sensitive data, maintain compliance with security standards, and prevent potential disruptions caused by security breaches . At Azure Kubernetes service we are constantly working hard and innovating to guarantee maximum security for your Node operating systems. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operating System (OS) security patches are crucial for maintaining the integrity and security of your systems. These patches address vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors and ensure that your system remains protected against the latest threats. Regularly applying OS security patches helps to safeguard sensitive data, maintain compliance with security standards, and prevent potential disruptions caused by security breaches. At Azure Kubernetes Service we are constantly working hard and innovating to guarantee maximum security for your Node operating systems. 
```

**Auto Node Image Channel** - AKS updates nodes weekly with a newly patched VHD for security and bug fixes. This update, which follows maintenance windows and surge settings, incurs no extra VHD cost. Linux unattended upgrades are disabled by default when using this channel. Node image upgrades are supported as long as the cluster's Kubernetes minor version is in support. These AKS-tested node images are fully managed and applied with safe deployment practices.
**OS Security Patch Channel** - Several customers may need only the security packages for their OS without additional bug fixes and updates. Customers previously relied on nightly updates and reboot mechanisms like KURED for security updates. Past outages from untested packages highlighted the need for a managed security patch-only channel at the node level.  With OS Security Patch channel you get precisely that a fully managed attended Node OS security only channel! This automates manual processes, eliminating the need for tools like KURED. The Security-Patch channel reimages nodes only when necessary and provides live patch updates with zero disruption, respecting planned maintenance windows.

> ## OS Security Patch channel how it fares against Node Image Channel

Reviewer 3: So is there any case where customer still want to have NodeImage channel (I guess there is scenario where they want to be disrupted less frequently?), suggesting adding a sentence to explain

Author: yes they can consider NodeImage if they are interested in latest VHD esp with the bug fixes and features outside security patch .

When comparing OS security patch channel with the Node Image channel, several advantages become apparent:

> - **Faster Patching Cadence**: OS security patches are released at a much faster rate than Node Image updates on average 1 to 2 weeks ahead. This ensures that critical vulnerabilities (CVEs) are addressed promptly, reducing the window of exposure. 

Reviewer 2: Some clarification here: faster cadence makes me think that in the same timespan, we get more OS security patches, while the follow up sentence (the "updates on average 1 to 2 weeks ahead") makes me think it releases earlier. Which is the case? Or is it both?

If both, think this can be reworded to showcase the increased cadence over Node Image updates (e.g. 5 times a week vs 1 time a week), and another bullet can be added to highlight security patches are released sooner than Node image updates (e.g. 1 week after CVE fixes vs. once a month).

Reviewer 2: Edit: the last sentence underneath seems to cover the latter point:

"if the Node Image channel reimages 10 times within a certain period, the OS Security Patch channel would likely reimage only 3 or 4 times during the same timeframe."

## How to Enable OS Security Patch Channel

### Creating cluster in Portal

1. In the Azure portal, select Create a resource > Containers > Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).
2. In the Basics tab, under Cluster details, select the desired channel type from the Node security channel type dropdown.
![Cluster Details!](/AKS/assets/images/enhance-security-with-os-security-patch/create-secpatch.jpg).
3. Select Security channel scheduler and choose the desired maintenance window using the [Planned Maintenance feature](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/planned-maintenance?tabs=azure-cli). We recommend selecting the default option Every week on Sunday (recommended).
![Security Patch Schedule!](/AKS/assets/images/enhance-security-with-os-security-patch/sec-channel-schedule.png).

> ### Existing clusters UX in portal

Reviewer 2: Applies to "Creating cluster in Portal as well", but either creating a learn page for these steps, or linking to an existing one could help with consolidating instructions.

Author: Yes we have it already in the doc but just a quick view on how things can be set up i thought was warranted here.

Author: But for CLI and API i ll refer to the doc link here for learn more

- **Monitor Upgrade Status**: Regularly monitor the status of ongoing upgrades to ensure that patches are applied successfully. Utilize tools such as the [AKS Communication Manager](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/aks-communication-manager) to get periodic notifications on OS Patching updates. 
- **Release Tracker**: [AKS release tracker](https://releases.aks.azure.com/webpage/index.html) provides region by region updates on what security patch version runs in a particular region.  This real time update is important especially as you track CVEs closely.  There is also a AKS CVE status tab. 
![Release Tracker!](/AKS/assets/images/enhance-security-with-os-security-patch/sec-patch-reltracker.jpg).

### What is Coming Next for OS Security Patch?
The future of OS security patches promises several enhancements aimed at improving the patching process and ensuring even greater security:

> - Network Isolated cluster support for Security Patch. 

Reviewer 3: Better to say: Support for network isolated cluster.

- Snapshotting similar to Ubuntu in Azure Linux.
- Kubelet and ContainerD patching via OS security patch.

> - Support for Airgapped cloud environments.

Reviewer 2: Think this could apply for all 4 of these features, but maybe a hyperlink to a GitHub feature or somewhere that CX can use to track progress?

date: 2025-04-22
authors:
- Kaarthikeyan Subramanian
- Ye Wang
categories: 
- Security
- Workload SLO
- Upgrades
---

## Why do we need Security patches at the Node Operating System level?

Operating System (OS) security patches are crucial for maintaining the integrity and security of your systems. These patches address vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors and ensure that your system remains protected against the latest threats. Regularly applying OS security patches helps to safeguard sensitive data, maintain compliance with security standards, and prevent potential disruptions caused by security breaches. At Azure Kubernetes Service we are constantly working hard and innovating to guarantee maximum security for your Node operating systems. 
Presently there are two ways to apply security patches at the OS level automatically with AKS. Read more [OS Security Patch](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/auto-upgrade-node-os-image?tabs=azure-cli)

> **Auto Node Image Channel** - AKS updates nodes weekly with a newly patched VHD for security and bug fixes. This update, which follows maintenance windows and surge settings, incurs no extra VHD cost. Linux unattended upgrades are disabled by default when using this channel. Node image upgrades are supported as long as the cluster's Kubernetes minor version is in support. These AKS-tested node images are fully managed and applied with safe deployment practices.

Reviewer 4: just a nit pick here, but should we use the names on the documentation? ```SecurityPatch``` and ```NodeImage```?

> **OS Security Patch Channel** - Several customers may need only the security packages for their OS without additional bug fixes and updates. Customers previously relied on nightly updates and reboot mechanisms like KURED for security updates. Past outages from untested packages highlighted the need for a managed security patch-only channel at the node level.  With OS Security Patch channel you get precisely that a fully managed attended Node OS security only channel! This automates manual processes, eliminating the need for tools like KURED. The Security-Patch channel reimages nodes only when necessary and provides live patch updates with zero disruption, respecting planned maintenance windows.

Author: Good point - but we deliberately posted past outages since its an open secret as many customers have experienced it and we declared public outages most notoriously and notably in Aug 2023 when numerous cluster impacted from canonical packages.

## OS Security Patch channel - How it fares against Node Image Channel
When comparing OS security patch channel with the Node Image channel, several advantages become apparent:

> - **Faster Patching Cadence**: OS security patches are released at a much faster rate than Node Image updates on average 1 to 2 weeks ahead. This ensures that critical vulnerabilities (CVEs) are addressed promptly, reducing the window of exposure. 

Reviewer 4: We've gotten quite a few questions about CVEs. Would it be useful to also link to some of our new  releases on here to? https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/security-bulletins/overview?tabs=aks-addons%2Caks-cluster%2Caks-node-image https://releases.aks.azure.com/webpage/index.html?

Author: Yes i can throw in the link.

---
title: "Enhancing Your Operating System's Security with OS Security Patches in AKS"
description: "Learn the what, the whys, and the hows of configuring OS Security Patch Auto upgrade channel.  The article also covers some reasons for OS Security Patch, with some primary benefits being increased performance, better security, and minimal disruption to workloads."
date: 2025-04-22
authors:
- Kaarthikeyan Subramanian
- Ye Wang
categories: 
- Security
- Operations
---

## Why Do We Need Security Patches at the Node Operating System Level?

> Operating System (OS) security patches are crucial for maintaining the integrity and security of your systems. These patches address vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors, ensuring that your system remains protected against the latest threats. Regular OS security patches safeguard data, ensure compliance, and prevent disruptions. At Azure Kubernetes service we are constantly working hard and innovating to guarantee maximum security for your Node operating systems. 

Reviewer: Capital S in service (?)

Presently there are two ways to apply security patches at the OS level automatically with AKS. Read more [OS Security Patch](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/auto-upgrade-node-os-image?tabs=azure-cli)

> **Auto Node Image Channel** - AKS updates nodes weekly with a newly patched VHD for security and bug fixes. This update, which follows maintenance windows and surge settings, incurs no extra VHD cost. Linux unattended upgrades are disabled by default when using this channel. Node image upgrades are supported as long as the cluster's Kubernetes minor version is in support. These AKS-tested node images are fully managed and applied with safe deployment practices.

Reviewer: Is this the name? I always refer to it as Automatic Node Image Upgrade channel. 
Even if cutting the upgrade, I'd suggest not shortening automatic.

Reviewer: I don't think there should be any mention here of VHD cost, if you want to mention costs below on the next channel it's fine but here, given it's the first option it looks out of place. "VHD cost? why would it incur any VHD cost at all?"

I understand you're trying to compare it with the below but that information hasn't come up in the blog yet.

Reviewer: Similarly, it's equally out of place to bring unattended upgrades here without any prior explanation, most people have no idea what unattended upgrades are. Also that's an Ubuntu thing, not a Linux thing, it has slightly different names for similar functionality in other OSs.

If you want to include it here, you need to do a preamble before where you touch upon it, and maybe describe classical ways in how patching is done / approached in VMs before.

Author: Removed VHD cost and put it under comparison table. Added a clear preamble on traditional sec patching and the gaps there before introing our two managed options.

> **OS Security Patch Channel** - Several customers may need only the security packages for their OS without additional bug fixes and updates. Previously, customers relied on nightly updates and reboot mechanisms, such as KURED, for security updates. Untested package outages highlighted the need for a managed security patch-only channel at the node level. The OS Security Patch channel provides a fully managed, attended Node OS security-only solution. It automates manual processes, eliminating the need for tools like KURED. The Security-Patch channel reimages nodes only when necessary and provides live patch updates with zero disruption, respecting planned maintenance windows.

Reviewer: the acronym is Kured or KuReD IIRC ?

Reviewer: Similarly to above you're telling things that are not necessary now to an audience that at large doesn't even know these things. I don't disagree with mentioning, but I suggest a longer and more comprehensive preamble that describe how patching is done in traditional VMs, and in K8s nodes, there you can list and expand all these concepts and then here say how you're solving / not requiring them.

Also it's quite significant to explain why "eliminating" (probably better word needed) kured is "good" at all. Otherwise begs the question " why would I want to eliminate kured and unattended upgrades" if they do the job?

Reviewer: Finally above you mention VHD cost, whereas here you don't. Additionally given below you dedicate sections on comparison, maybe instead of bringing that info here it simply should be mentioned here, and more on the sections below.

Author: No its kured https://github.com/kubereboot/kured

Author: Removed vhd costing from here and added it under cost comparison in the table. Added a preamble on how security patching was done traditionally and where the gaps are before delving into managed options at AKS.

- **Minimal Disruptions to workload**: OS security patches focus solely on security packages, avoiding the inclusion of binaries and bug fixes that could potentially disrupt workloads. This targeted approach minimizes disruptions, making it ideal for maintaining Workload Service Level Objectives (SLOs), especially if you are sensitive to dependencies. The OS Security Patch channel reimages approximately 60-70% less frequently than the Auto Node Image channel. In other words, if the Node Image channel reimages 10 times within a certain period, the OS Security Patch channel would likely reimage only 3 or 4 times during the same timeframe.
- **Better way to handle capacity Constraints**: Every reimage typically results in the creation of 'Surge' nodes, which can be problematic if you are operating in a capacity-constrained region or SKU. The OS Security Patch channel reduces surging by reimaging 60-70% less frequently than the Auto Node Image channel. This makes it an ideal solution for workloads with capacity constraints.

> - **Livepatching and Ubuntu snapshots**: Canonical snapshots are now [seamlessly integrated for Ubuntu in AKS](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/linuxandopensourceblog/increased-security-and-resiliency-of-canonical-workloads-on-azure---now-in-previ/3970623). With the OS Security Patch channel, Ubuntu cluster nodes automatically download essential security patches and updates from the Ubuntu snapshot service, ensuring predictability and consistency in cloud deployments. AKS rigorously tests these security packages and releases them through safe deployment practices under Azure. The OS Security Patch channel also features Livepatching capabilities for both Ubuntu and Azure Linux systems, significantly reducing the need for reimaging. Reimaging is only necessary for critical updates, such as Kernel package updates, making maintenance more efficient and less disruptive.

Reviewer: Livepatching usually is associated with kernel livepatching, so I'd be cautious of that since we're not enabling that

Author: Removed it and wherever we are calling it out i say it Live security patching.

> If your requirements go beyond just OS security packages and include bug fixes or additional binary updates, the Node Image channel would be the better choice. While the OS Security Patch channel excels in providing faster security updates with minimal disruptions, the Node Image channel offers a more comprehensive update approach, addressing both security and functionality enhancements.

Reviewer: As per comment above, I think this blog should more equitative and have a section on why/why not for each option.

Author: Made it a more objective equitative comparison and leaving it to readers better judgement

> ## How to Enable OS Security Patch Channel?

Reviewer: I don't think this should become a how to doc, why wouldn't this just be a pointed to the docs?

Reviewer: And similarly, this is making this blog a "please, use OS security patch", which is of dubious intent when the goal should be to provide similar awareness to node image

Author: Yes not advocating for one over other and presented a clear table comparison with pros and cons. Also as you rightly mentioned redirected How to to the docs.

- **Use Release Tracker**: [AKS release tracker](https://releases.aks.azure.com/webpage/index.html) provides region by region updates on what security patch version runs in a particular region. These real-time updates are crucial for closely tracking CVEs. There is also a AKS CVE status tab.![Screenshot of the AKS release tracker showing region-specific security patch updates!](/blog/assets/images/enhance-security-with-os-security-patch/sec-patch-reltracker.jpg).

### What Is Coming Next for OS Security Patch?

The future of OS security patches promises several enhancements aimed at improving the patching process and ensuring even greater security:

- [Support for Network Isolated Cluster](https://github.com/Azure/AKS/issues/4962).
- [Snapshotting similar to Ubuntu in Azure Linux](https://github.com/Azure/AKS/issues/4963).
- [Kubelet and ContainerD patching via OS security patch](https://github.com/Azure/AKS/issues/4964).

> - [Support for Airgapped cloud environments](https://github.com/Azure/AKS/issues/4965).

Reviewer: Windows?

Reviewer: Airgapped clouds are not public...

Author: Yes removed AGC and put in place windows.
